Okay. Today I want to talk about AJ.
Piplica. Who's the founder and CEO of Hermes,
a tech startup. A deep tech startup that's building a
hypersonic aircraft. It's a fascinating company.
And I actually first met him on Twitter. I had made this joke
about how if I were president for a day and I had complete control over,
the government would recommission the SR
71, the famous supersonic plane that was designed
by Lockheed Martin Skunkworks and has been out of commission for
a few decades now. And the reason was that I thought
that bringing the plane back would send an amazing message
to the world that America just takes
being in person super seriously. So the queen had recently
died, and it would have just been so badass in my mind if
the American president could have hopped on a supersonic plane
and been in London paying his respects 90
minutes after the news broke instead of a few days later when
Air Force One can kind of make a proper
trip. And so I had tweeted this joke
out and AJ. Replied and was like, I'm going to make that a reality.
I was like, okay. Yeah, he's got this company. He's got some cool renders.
Who knows if he's actually going to do it. But I
recently toured their facility, and it's very, very real.
He is absolutely building a hypersonic aircraft. And I
believe he's going to do it. And he's actually tracking his progress to
the speed at which Lockheed Martin Skunkworks Division built the SR
71. And he's trying to build a plane faster than
they did, which is incredible because it's one of, like, the historical incredible
projects like the Manhattan Project that just happened so quickly. And we
don't really see that in government projects. Everything goes over budget and over
time, and he's trying to bring that back. And it's really, really exciting to
you know, I've toured the facility. I spent a full day there
in Atlanta, and I met with all the co founders, saw everything
in facility, and it was just a fascinating experience. So I'm excited to
tell you about it. And I've actually done a few videos on YouTube about
supersonic technology in the past. One was about
the SR 71, and then the other one was about this company, Boom, which is
a Y combinator company. They've raised a bunch of money and they're making a supersonic
jetliner for commercial air flight. And it's a very, very different
approach. Boom. As you'll see with the story. Like they're going
non military. Pure commercial. They're building a lot of stuff themselves.
It's very capital intensive. And Hermes and AJ. Have just taken a completely
different approach, so it's definitely worth diving into. I want both companies
to succeed genuinely, just because it'd be really cool to be able to fly from
New York to London in 90 minutes. And It Would Also be Great if America
Could solve the hypersonic vehicle problem and have that
technology defending us. But I
like how Hermes has kind of decomposed the problem on their side, as you'll
see. So let's go into kind of why this matters.
So the first thing is that the race for hypersonic weapons
is super, super real right now. A lot of know it
just gets lost in the headlines about Russia, China, Ukraine, Taiwan. There's all
these different headlines going on, all these different geopolitical things.
But hypersonic weapons are a really big deal, and I'll
explain why. So we actually have hypersonic weapons.
They're just rocket powered. So any ICBM is
hypersonic. They travel at like, Mach 15,
and every SpaceX rocket that goes into orbit goes
well past hypersonic. And there isn't actually a true
hypersonic barrier. There's a supersonic barrier, which is very much
defined by physics. It's the point at which there's a sonic boom.
And so it's very, very hard to get past that. But with hypersonics, that happens
around mach five. But it isn't a very specific binary
moment. It's just a moment where you're going so fast that the air chemistry around
the vehicle changes. So there's a whole bunch of new problems
that you need to solve as an aircraft designer. And it's something that's really held
the technology back. It works very well on missiles,
where you're sending off a rocket and you don't really care that it's
going to come back because it's going to crash into your target. But in terms
of reusable craft, which is obviously the future, hypersonic has been
a real tough thing to solve. And the fear is
that China is developing hypersonic
missiles in Russia as well. And these hypersonic missiles can potentially carry
a nuclear warhead or potentially take out an aircraft carrier. And that creates kind of
a zone of defense around China that won't allow
our aircraft carriers to maneuver into position. And if you
remember, during the Taiwan strait cris, we actually brought
two aircraft carrier groups into the Taiwan strait to kind of defend Taiwan.
And if China has hypersonic missiles, we wouldn't be able to do that. And that's
a big problem. And now the reason that hypersonic missiles and hypersonic weapons are so
important is because it kind of splits the difference between what you get with an
ICBM, which is really, really fast, but ultimately very predictable,
because you're launching this rocket, it shoots off from the ground,
and it's on a parabolic curve, and you can kind of intercept it very easily.
On the flip side, you have a cruise missile which is
targeted with a turbofan. It's basically like a fighter jet, and that
means it's very maneuverable. If you've seen the old James Bond
GoldenEye, I think it's GoldenEye. There's this moment where
they fire off the cruise missile, and it's like flying through the canyons, and it's
evading defenses. It's going very low and it's very unpredictable. So it's hard to shoot
down, but it's ultimately slow so it can be shot down. And we have systems
for that. But no one can shoot down a hypersonic missile
at this point because it goes so fast, mach Five, and it's also maneuverable.
So blending those two things together is really, really valuable.
Now, Hermes isn't building hypersonic missiles. They're building hypersonic aircraft.
And so that has a number of different applications. The first
is ISR or intelligence surveillance and Reconnaissance,
which is basically cameras and sensors on a plane. And this
will allow the Hermes craft to kind of get
into enemy airspace and take photos and do reconnaissance
without getting shot down because it's traveling so fast. But it's also not
predictable, the trajectory. And then ultimately,
they do want to turn into a weapons platform and deploy drop bombs or
drop missiles from it. And then ultimately, in the long,
long term, they want to be able to carry people because obviously that would unlock
a ton of really interesting applications. So the
government has been working on this for a very long time. There's the SR 72,
which is Lockheed's successor to the SR 71. That program,
it was made public and then it was made private again when the stakes
got raised and people started worrying about the hypersonic
race really heating up. So we don't know that much about the SR 72
project. But then there's also the Air Force's Mayhem
project, which is another hypersonic program.
And so Hermes is in kind of a very exciting
space. But they're really the main startup that's really trying
to go after this problem with kind of that startup mentality, really quick iteration.
And we'll kind of get into their process of how they have
solved some of the really hard problems to be able to iterate on this problem
really quickly. And so the other
point is that it's just an interesting company. They've raised $100 million from really cool
investors. Kosla did their first round. Canaan did
their second round. And then Sam Altman did their third round. And Founders Fund is
also invested. So obviously I'm interested. And it's always
good to see Sam Altman investing in something other than AI. Because it means that
he doesn't just think that AI. Is going to dominate everything.
He thinks that in the future, there will be a need for hypersonic aircraft,
which I love to hear. So let's go into the background on,
you know, he's born in Port Chester, New York, but he moves to South Florida
in his early childhood. He loves Star Trek as a kid,
and specifically, he loves that in Star Trek, most of the
stories are driven by super, super fast vehicles.
So all of the narratives revolve around going from one place to another
extremely quickly. And so he develops this love of high
speed aircraft very early. And then he also goes to an air
show, and he sees a massive C Five aircraft, which is like one of the
biggest cargo planes that's used by the military and he
gets fascinated with this. And so he winds up going to study
engineering at Georgia tech. He gets a bachelor's and a master's. He studied aerodynamics
and fluid mechanics, which are like perfect for what he does because obviously
you need really good aerodynamics to go mach five. And then when you're going
mach five, fluid dynamics comes into it because the air chemistry is
actually changing around the vehicle. So he kind of has the perfect background
for hypersonic technology. And then
he gets his first job. He works at NASA, the Johnson
space center. But he gets his first job in this really weird way where
his parents had gone to a talk that was hosted
by Bill Nye, the science guy. And while they're
there, they meet the CEO of this small aerospace company called
spaceworks that's based in Atlanta. And the CEO,
they tell the CEO, hey, we have this son who's really interested
in aerospace. And he's like, whoa, well you should tell him
to apply for an internship. So AJ does, and he gets an internship
and he starts working at this company. He works his way up from intern to
eventually becoming the CEO of a full subsidiary. It's a really fascinating
rise. He just like rocket trajectory, no pun
intended. And so he's an intern. And then he goes
part time while he's in school. And after he graduates, he goes full time at
spaceworks. And then Spaceworks creates a subsidiary called generation
orbit, or Go, which is what the guys refer to it as.
And the idea with this subsidiary was that they were going to create a hypersonic
launch vehicle for small satellites. So if you remember
back in 2013, 2015, there was
a big kind of hype cycle almost around small satellites.
So that's what SpaceX and Starlink became.
You put up a bunch of these communication satellites and then you can do interesting
things, whether that's in flight wi fi, or wireless
in remote areas, there's a bunch of different applications. And then obviously
there's military contracts as well. And so he is
building this team out. He comes and joins as, he technically joined as
the COO of the subsidiary. But then he got promoted to COO.
And he basically builds out this whole team, hires a bunch of people.
And the four key people that he hires at this company
become all of his co founders at Hermes. And there's a very interesting
kind of trajectory there. So they wind up building this
thing. It's basically a ramjet, but it's air launched. So the
big problem with ramjets, which is really the core technology that unlocks
hypersonic flight, is that you need to get them up to speed.
You can't start them on the ground like you can with a turbo fan.
So a normal jet engine that you see in a fighter jet that
takes off from an aircraft carrier, you spin up that engine and it just slowly
starts producing more and more power until you're able to just take off and
then you can go really, really fast. You can go Mach One, Mach Two,
but those tend to cap out, and you can't push a turbofan to Mach
Five, where the air chemistry changes, the air starts getting compressed by the shockwaves.
It gets really, really complicated. Basically what they
would do is they would fly up in a plane and then they would launch
the Ramjet, which would then push the small satellite into
orbit. And this was kind of the idea. There's been a bunch
of different approaches to launching small satellites, but that's what he was
doing. He's getting all this hypersonic
experience, but he realizes that he wants to go bigger. And it seems like
he basically built this amazing co founding team, but they
didn't really have support from the ownership because they're this subsidiary
and they're kind of operating as a startup, but they probably didn't have equity
like a normal startup. And it was kind of and they probably didn't have all
the decision making authority and they clearly had the skill sets. So eventually
they break off. And it's kind of unclear how rough of an experience
that was, but I get the feeling that it definitely shaped AJ's
worldview and his drive. Like he wants to make this thing a success
because of his experience in that kind of subsidiary world.
And now he really owns his own destiny and that's very satisfying to him.
So he puts together this team. While he's there, he gets this
guy Glenn from Blue Origin Skyler, who interned at
SpaceX. And then he eventually hires this guy Mike, who is a PhD and
also worked at SpaceX. So he has this really, really solid team in aerospace.
And they'd won some contracts with the government
and NASA and DoD, and they spent three
years working together. But then they eventually break off. And so when
they break off, they have this great founding team. But they're all engineers and
so they're not these financial shark
guys who can go out and raise money on a pitch deck and a render
overnight and just put together a massive funding round like a lot of people could
during the boom. This was around 2018 when they started the company.
So they're having a lot of trouble pitching the company. They apply to YC,
and in a really weird thing, YC doesn't do second round interviews.
They read your application, they do a 15 minutes interview
and then they tell you they call you and tell you you got it.
Or they send you an email and say, sorry, you didn't get it. But with
Hermes, they actually gave them a second phone call and talked to them more
and then decided that they didn't get the company. And this is like a really
rough setback because obviously YC had funded
Boom and it seemed like a cool would be a good
fit, but the team didn't take it too hard. They just realized that
they needed some people to help them pitch the company. So they put together this
board of advisors of kind of more experienced,
more reputable people who can kind of lend their credibility and this
board of advisors kind of helps them kind of get the round together.
They get really, really far with one VC who
they didn't tell me the name but they were like
clearly at the term sheet stage or in due diligence and at
the last second they basically get rugged and the deal
falls through. And they're all crushed because when the guys started the company
they basically had all saved up enough money to live for six months
on their personal burn rates. But if the company didn't
get funding after six months they were going to have to get other jobs.
Like the momentum was going to stall. It probably wouldn't have
worked out. So they're getting really close to this and they
lose the deal and so they all just kind of
like take a day off and they go and work on basically the stupidest
business ideas I've ever heard. And I think that they would agree that
they were really dumb. Like, one guy goes off and builds
a business plan to try and create a party bus that
has a hot tub in it, and he's solving all these complex physics equations
to see how the water would slosh around. It's like really, really silly
stuff, but it scratches that itch for just, like, a really
ridiculous problem that you can bring an engineering mindset
to. They basically do a hackathon. And AJ goes off and thinks about selling Hamon
Aberico, which is like this meat. I'd never even heard of it, but he's thinking
about buying this meat and selling it on the street kind of directly to people
because he found out that it has really high margins, and they're basically just
in the lowest of lows. But then they get an email from
Kosala Ventures who they had sent a pitch deck to and never really heard
from a couple of months earlier. And Vinod Kosla wants to meet with them
and another one of the partners, Sven, brings them in and they'd
give this pitch and at the time they were just doing like a precede,
like going to YC they only needed like 100K. Just kind of keep the
lights on. Maybe don't even start building an engine because that'd
be really expensive. Maybe just work on the pitch deck the story,
get some spreadsheets together and then go raise like a real seed round.
But Kosla is liking it so they kind of size up their ask in
mid meeting. They're kind of like, yeah, we could definitely put a million or two
to work. So they get their seed round done, I think it's a couple million
bucks and that lets them go and build their first engine.
And this starts kind of the cycle for Hermes,
which is when you're doing this really hard deep tech
problem, you can't just go straight to the finish line and try
and build the hypersonic aircraft that has ISR capabilities and
weapons on board and can defeat China. That's way too tall
of an order. There's just too many unknowns. It's too capital intensive and
there's way too much risk. So instead, they focus
on this very broken up Iterative approach. So they basically
raise money and then they build an engine. Then they go and
test it. And we'll get into testing. It's crazy how complicated testing
is for this company. And then they get a contract with government, which proves revenue
or like, demand, and then they go and raise more, and then they've just kind
of iterated on this basically every year. And that's allowed them to solve some
of the really hard problems with working with the government and the DoD.
And so they get the money from
Kosla and
then they start building their first engine. So they basically built
this, I saw as a very rudimentary turbojet
that spins up and provides some propellant into
the Ramjet and then at a certain point flips over and then you're using the
Ramjet power. And that's kind of the whole model.
They're now building what's called the Chimera engine because obviously Chimera
is like two things melded together and that
really unlocks their ability to go both take off from the ground and
go slow, but then also go really, really fast once the Ramjet kicks on.
And so they get through this, they go and they
build the first engine. And then they have to go and test it.
And there's only like one or two wind
tunnels that can actually test hypersonic engines that
are publicly available. Or you can just they have capacity. There are
probably some private ones, but startups don't have access to
those. And I actually talked to this defense journalist, Alex Hollings,
and I asked him if there was one thing that you could do if
you were the President for a day, what would you do to help
America win the race for hypersonic weaponry?
And I was expecting him to, you know, pump some money into grants,
know, accelerate this project or that project. And he told me, no,
the one thing that the government needs to do is have more
hypersonic testing tunnels built at various
academic institutions and research facilities because that's
truly where the key bottleneck
is right now, in hypersonic research. So the guys drive
their engine up to Indiana. I think they went to Notre Dame, where they
have the tunnel, and they test it and it works, and they get good data
and they prove that this idea of running the
turbojet engine and then switching over to the Ramjet at a certain speed,
it will work. And so that unlocks their Series A and then
they get that done with Canaan.
It's really funny about Ramjets everyone I've talked to who's technical in
the defense tech hard tech world just loves
Ramjets. There's this famous story about Palmer Lucky,
where when Trey Stevens was pitching him the idea for
Anderol, Palmer was already building a Ramjet
in his swimming pool in Woodside, I think, and the neighbors were
getting called, the cops were getting called because he's like building this crazy thing.
But clearly every tinkerer loves Ramjets.
And it's really cool to see Hermes finally trying to figure out how to commercialize
these in a really serious way because it's a very old technology. But the
real problem is not necessarily the
tech risk here. And that's always kind of the best
thing in defense tech startups is
when they're not science projects, they're not trying to go off and invent
an entirely new material or do fundamental material science research or
have some fundamental breakthrough. It's more like the technology works.
We just need to put it together in a different way. And then we need
to solve all the hard steps of fundraising and then
actually selling this into the military because that's obviously a really hard part.
And so getting
into the military and actually solving the Valley of
Death is a theme that I've seen with all these companies. And so
the way Hermes solved it was, first off, they hired this great guy from
Anderol who had worked there and had a bunch of experience selling to the
military. And then they really,
really take a broad approach to what they're willing
to do with government contracts. So their first contract,
I believe, was to evaluate the viability of
a hypersonic Air Force One. And I
think they had a couple of million bucks in the bank. There was no way
that they were going to promise to build a hypersonic Air Force One. But the
fact that they were still able to get a contract
and actually get some response from the government
and get some buy in that, hey, we will actually
give you money. There's now revenue on the books just to deliver kind
of just a report and some data. And that's been some of
the early projects. Everyone, obviously you want
to drive to program of record where the military and
the government is buying a capability on an ongoing basis. They're actually deploying
it. It's having an impact. But with something that's as complicated as building a hypersonic
aircraft, it's just not going to happen in year one or year two or
even year three. So getting to the point, really understanding that
and getting revenue on the books by doing these small programs
where they can just turn over data or reports or just build one
small piece for the government, but still satisfy and get good
reviews and then get ready for the next contract, that's been a really
big piece. And so one interesting
learning, I mean, there's a bunch of interesting learnings, but one thing that they focused
on throughout my conversation and my tour of the facility
was the machine that builds the machine.
So they're not just focused on building one aircraft,
they really need to solve the entire supply chain
and figure out how they can build an organization
that produces these aircraft at scale
in numbers pretty quickly. Because if it works,
we know that the demand is know, russia and China are building
a lot of these hypersonic weapons already. And so as soon as this
thing is ready to go, the government will need a lot of them. And so
hermes is going to need to solve their supply chain issues. So I think
they got an investment from raytheon. And raytheon owns pratt and Whitney,
which makes jet engines for American fightercraft.
I think the f 22, it might be the f 16, but they've actually
bought two of these huge pratt and whitney turbojet
engines. And then they're going to basically take off
the back, the afterburner of those
jet engines and then attach their ram jets
to them. And that will be the way that they build their engine.
And it's very interesting because they're clearly obsessed with this idea of
build versus buy. There's a lot that they still have to build. They're constantly,
I mean, for the first version, I was
talking to the co founder about how
they were bending the pipes themselves and welding everything together themselves.
And now they have really big 3D printing machines and all sorts of different ways
to fabricate parts. But something as complicated as a jet engine,
they're not going to be able to rebuild that internally, at least
not anytime soon. So that's kind of why they've partnered and how they're
thinking about building the machine that builds the
machine. It's a really interesting phrase. And then
that obviously really puts them in a different strategy
as boom, which was originally, I think, partnered with rolls Royce
to buy their engine. But then that didn't work
out. I'm not exactly sure why. But now boom is trying to build
a fully custom engine and it's going to be incredibly capital intensive.
And the way boom is solving it is they're going off and getting
money from the airlines
and basically saying, hey, if you want access to
supersonic aircraft on your most important flight routes,
you better pony up and give us $200 million up front, or something
like that. I don't exactly know the numbers,
but for hermes, the government wants them
to really bring this to market as fast as possible. And obviously they don't want
to get stuck in the integration hell technical quagmire
that might come with trying to build a turbojet or
turbofan engine by themselves, especially when the off the shelf
stuff works. And then the last thing that I noticed
with hermes that's kind of very interesting
and maybe under discussed is that even though they're all
engineers and they had all this trouble pitching
the company in the early days, but they're all really good
at media now and I think they really understand the value of media. Even in
a hard tech business where you're not selling to consumers,
their customers, ultimately it's the government, at least
for the next who knows how many years. But they
have a podcast and they do a lot of media and they let YouTubers come
in and tour it and make videos and stuff and they
talk publicly about what they're building and I think that that
really lets them solve. They're in Atlanta, they're going to need to
pull people from all over the place to build this
really solid engineering team. And so
by having all of the co founders talk about the company culture, talk about
the company evangelize for what they're doing,
they're able to bring the
customer is almost the employee. So they're able to recruit a bunch of people and
then they're also able to have
a really polished resource for
the various politicians to get up to speed in Silicon
Valley. I feel like everyone knows androol but
I was talking to a congressman a couple months ago who had
no idea what Androl was it just wasn't on his radar
and he was telling me that he has defense
budget to allocate and obviously anderol has
like I think they have a hundred person team in Washington DC.
Just to help sell to the government, educate people. But there's just the government's so
big, there's hundreds of elected officials
and then, like, thousands of people in the DoD that you might
need to coordinate with. And so being able to tell
your story, the Hermias team being able to
tell their story is really, really important to get
the important people and the key decision makers up to speed, to be able to
make a decision on a contract very, very quickly and maybe decide to
take a meeting that they wouldn't otherwise. And I think that's kind of a
new era and obviously Palmer's leading the charge there.
But there are obviously things that certain
defense tech companies aren't going to be able to talk about. Even while I was
there, there were obviously things that were classified and they couldn't talk about.
But there's still so much cool stuff that they can talk about know?
It's not just like the culture of their company in Atlanta. It's also just like
the history of this technology and why it's important the geopolitical implications,
their fundraising story and what they're actually building. A lot of
that isn't classified. Maybe the more minut details are,
but I was just very surprised that they were
so open and are so capable of
telling their story and really articulating why
this is such an important thing. So yeah,
that's the story of Hermes. I'm going to do a bigger video on this and
cut together a bunch of the interview footage that I got while I
was there. And yeah, I'm excited to share that with.